README.md, before:

minioc (alpha) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/flitbit/minioc.png)](http://travis-ci.org/flitbit/minioc)
======

A miniature, conventions-based IOC implementation for nodejs.

## Background

After using [angularjs](http://angularjs.org/) for a while I became envious of its IoC facility and decided to create something for nodejs that delivered similar convenience.

## Brief

`minioc` supports 3 types of registrations, _bald values_, _factories_, and _ctors_.

type | description
--- | ---
bare value | Any javascript object (string, number, function, etc.).
factory | A function that produces values.
ctor | A class, intended to be called with the `new` operator.

`minioc` follows a simple convention when resolving: if the target is a function, the container will inject arguments that begins with a dollar sign `$` such as '$people'. All other arguments are left alone unless provided by the caller.

## Features

[*] [Register bare values](#bald-values)
[*] [Registering factories](#factories)
[*] [Registering classes](#classes)
[*] [Constructor injection](#injection)
[*] [Singletons](#singletons)

## Installation

[node.js](http://nodejs.org)
```bash
$ npm install minioc
```

## Example

[readme-example-1.js](https://github.com/flitbit/minioc/blob/master/examples/readme-example-1.js)
```javascript
var minioc = require('minioc')
, expect   = require('expect.js')
;

// There is always a root container...
var root = minioc.root;
expect(root).to.be.ok();

// When you've got a container, it has no registrations
// except itself ($container) and the root ($root)...

expect(minioc.get('$container')).to.be(root);
expect(minioc.get('$root')).to.be(root);

// You can register values...

minioc.register('four').as.value(4);
expect(minioc.get('four')).to.be(4);

var foo = { what: 'foo' };
minioc.register('$foo').as.value(foo);
expect(minioc.get('$foo')).to.be(foo);

// You can register factories, each #get will invoke
// the factory and return the result...

var factory = function() {
	// within factories, `this` is bound to the container...
	return this.get('$foo');
};

minioc.register('$factory').as.factory(factory);
expect(minioc.get('$factory')).to.be(foo);

// You can register factories that take arguments you
// expect to be injected, I adopted the convention
// used by angularjs: arguments beginning with `$`
// will be fulfilled by the container...

var accessor = function($foo) {
	return $foo;
}

minioc.register('$accessor').as.factory(accessor);
expect(minioc.get('$accessor')).to.be(foo);

// You may also supply your own arguments in place of those
// that would have been injected...

var bar = { what: 'bar' };
var it = minioc.get('$accessor', { $foo: bar });
expect(it).to.be(bar);

// You can register classes, each #get will invoke the
// constructor and return the result...

function Person(name, age) {
	this.name = name || 'unknown';
	this.age = (typeof age !== 'undefined') ? age : 'nunya';
}

minioc.register('Person').as.ctor(Person);

var first = minioc.get('Person');
expect(first).to.be.a(Person);

var second = minioc.get('Person');
expect(second).to.be.a(Person);

expect(second).to.not.be(first);

// You can initialize arguments to constructors by name...

var info = { name: 'Phillip', age: 'old enough to know better' };
var me = minioc.get('Person', info);

expect(me.name).to.be(info.name);
expect(me.age).to.be(info.age);
```

## API

### `minioc`

When you import the `minioc` module, the resulting object is a constructor for the Container class, but it also provides several convenience methods that can be used directly.

* `create` - _function_ - creates a new nested container.
* `get` - _function_ - gets an item according to its registration with the root container.
* `has` - _function_ - determines if an item has a registration with the root container.
* `register` - _function_ - registers a named item with the root container.
* `root` - _property_ - provides access to the root container.
* `when` - _function_ - registers a callback invoked when a named item becomes available in the root container.

### `Container`

Containers are nested. The root container always exists and most registrations will be made there. Nested containers provide isolation boundaries where registrations can be specialized (overriden).

#### constructor

Container's constructor takes an optional argument, `next`, which indicates where the container is nested. Containers form a chain back to the `root` container, so if `next` is omitted, it will automatically be chained to `root`.

#### behavior

* `get` - _function_ - gets an item according to its registration.
* `has` - _function_ - determines if an item has a registration.
* `register` - _function_ - registers a named item and returns its `Registration`.
* `when` - _function_ - registers a callback invoked when a named item becomes available.

### `Registration`

Registrations are used to instruct the container as to how each registered object should be treated. It establishes the behavior related to each.

### Function Descriptions

**get**: gets an item registered with the container

```javascript
var it = minioc.get('what');
```
If you're getting something that takes arguments, you may fulfill those arguments, overriding any injected or configured values.
```javascript
var it = minioc.get('what', { $domain: 'joe.bob.me' });
```

**has**: determines if the container can fulfill requests for an item
```javascript
if (minioc.has('what')) {
	console.log('yay');
}
```
**register**: registers an item with the container.

```javascript
// as a bare-value...
minioc.register('$calculator').as.value(new Calculator);

// ... or as a factory ...
minioc.register('$calculator').as.factory(function() {
	return new (Calculator());
});

// ... or as a ctor ...
minioc.register('$calculator').as.ctor(Calculator);
```

**when**: provides a callback to be invoked when a particular, named item gets registered.

```javascript
minioc.when('$calculator', function(it) {
	// `it` refers to the calculator here.
};
```

## Usage

Once minioc is installed, any module directly referencing the container must import it.

```javascript
var minioc = require('minioc');
```
## Obtaining a Container

Once imported, `minioc` can be used _as_ the root container.

```javascript
var minioc = require('minioc')
, expect = require('expect.js')
;

expect(minioc).to.have.property('has');
expect(minioc).to.have.property('get');
expect(minioc).to.have.property('when');
expect(minioc).to.have.property('register');
```

<a href="bald-values"></a>
### Registering Bald Values

Any javascript object can be placed in the container by name and retrieved later.

Commit message:

added tests, some refinement & bug fixes

README.md, after:

minioc (alpha) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/flitbit/minioc.png)](http://travis-ci.org/flitbit/minioc)
======

A miniature, conventions-based IOC implementation for nodejs.

!! This document is a work in progress.

## Background

After using [angularjs](http://angularjs.org/) for a while I became envious of its IoC facility and decided to create something for nodejs that delivered similar convenience.

## Brief

`minioc` supports 3 types of registrations, _bald values_, _factories_, and _ctors_.

type | description
--- | ---
bare value | Any javascript object (string, number, function, etc.).
factory | A function that produces values.
ctor | A class, intended to be called with the `new` operator.

`minioc` follows a simple convention when resolving: if the target is a function, the container will inject arguments that begins with a dollar sign `$` such as '$people'. All other arguments are left alone unless provided by the caller.

## Installation

[node.js](http://nodejs.org)
```bash
$ npm install minioc
```

## Example

[readme-example-1.js](https://github.com/flitbit/minioc/blob/master/examples/readme-example-1.js)
```javascript
var minioc = require('minioc')
, expect   = require('expect.js')
;

// There is always a root container...
var root = minioc.root;
expect(root).to.be.ok();

// When you've got a container, it has no registrations
// except itself ($container) and the root ($root)...

expect(minioc.get('$container')).to.be(root);
expect(minioc.get('$root')).to.be(root);

// You can register values...

minioc.register('four').as.value(4);
expect(minioc.get('four')).to.be(4);

var foo = { what: 'foo' };
minioc.register('$foo').as.value(foo);
expect(minioc.get('$foo')).to.be(foo);

// You can register factories, each #get will invoke
// the factory and return the result...

var factory = function() {
	// within factories, `this` is bound to the container...
	return this.get('$foo');
};

minioc.register('$factory').as.factory(factory);
expect(minioc.get('$factory')).to.be(foo);

// You can register factories that take arguments you
// expect to be injected, I adopted the convention
// used by angularjs: arguments beginning with `$`
// will be fulfilled by the container...

var accessor = function($foo) {
	return $foo;
}

minioc.register('$accessor').as.factory(accessor);
expect(minioc.get('$accessor')).to.be(foo);

// You may also supply your own arguments in place of those
// that would have been injected...

var bar = { what: 'bar' };
var it = minioc.get('$accessor', { $foo: bar });
expect(it).to.be(bar);

// You can register classes; each #get will invoke the
// constructor and return the result...

function Person(name, age) {
	this.name = name || 'unknown';
	this.age = (typeof age !== 'undefined') ? age : 'nunya';
}

minioc.register('Person').as.ctor(Person);

var first = minioc.get('Person');
expect(first).to.be.a(Person);

var second = minioc.get('Person');
expect(second).to.be.a(Person);

expect(second).to.not.be(first);

// You can initialize arguments to constructors by name...

var info = { name: 'Phillip', age: 'old enough to know better' };
var me = minioc.get('Person', info);

expect(me.name).to.be(info.name);
expect(me.age).to.be(info.age);
```
<a href="#tests">$nbsp</a>
## Tests

Tests use [mocha](http://visionmedia.github.io/mocha/) and [expect.js](https://github.com/LearnBoost/expect.js/), so if you clone the [github repository](https://github.com/flitbit/minioc) you'll need to run:

```bash
npm install
```

... followed by ...

```bash
npm test
```

## API

### `minioc`

When you import the `minioc` module, the resulting object is a constructor for the Container class, but it also provides several convenience methods that can be used directly.

* `create` - _function_ - creates a new nested container.
* `get` - _function_ - gets an item according to its registration with the root container.
* `has` - _function_ - determines if an item has a registration with the root container.
* `register` - _function_ - registers a named item with the root container.
* `root` - _property_ - provides access to the root container.
* `when` - _function_ - registers a callback invoked when a named item becomes available in the root container.

### `Container`

Containers are nested. The root container always exists and most registrations will be made there. Nested containers provide isolation boundaries where registrations can be specialized (overriden).

#### constructor

Container's constructor takes an optional argument, `next`, which indicates where the container is nested. Containers form a chain back to the `root` container, so if `next` is omitted, it will automatically be chained to `root`.

#### behavior

* `get` - _function_ - gets an item according to its registration.
* `has` - _function_ - determines if an item has a registration.
* `register` - _function_ - registers a named item and returns its `Registration`.
* `when` - _function_ - registers a callback invoked when a named item becomes available.

### `Registration`

Registrations are used to instruct the container as to how each registered object should be treated. It establishes the behavior related to each.

### Function Descriptions

**get**: gets an item registered with the container

```javascript
var it = minioc.get('what');
```
If you're getting something that takes arguments, you may fulfill those arguments, overriding any injected or configured values.
```javascript
var it = minioc.get('what', { $domain: 'joe.bob.me' });
```

**has**: determines if the container can fulfill requests for an item
```javascript
if (minioc.has('what')) {
	console.log('yay');
}
```
**register**: registers an item with the container.

```javascript
// as a bare-value...
minioc.register('$calculator').as.value(new Calculator);

// ... or as a factory ...
minioc.register('$calculator').as.factory(function() {
	return new (Calculator());
});

// ... or as a ctor ...
minioc.register('$calculator').as.ctor(Calculator);
```

**when**: provides a callback to be invoked when a particular, named item gets registered.

```javascript
minioc.when('$calculator', function(it) {
	// `it` refers to the calculator here.
};
```

## Usage

Once minioc is installed, any module directly referencing the container must import it.

```javascript
var minioc = require('minioc');
```
## Obtaining a Container

Once imported, `minioc` can be used _as_ the root container.

```javascript
var minioc = require('minioc')
, expect = require('expect.js')
;

expect(minioc).to.have.property('has');
expect(minioc).to.have.property('get');
expect(minioc).to.have.property('when');
expect(minioc).to.have.property('register');
```

<a href="bald-values"></a>
### Registering Bald Values

Any javascript object can be placed in the container by name and retrieved later.
